Add tool update and review guidance (#8213)
galaxyproject/tools-iuc: docs/guide_for_tool_updates.md

```

Then run it without `--dry-run` when the proposed target is correct:

```sh
planemo autoupdate tools/<tool>/<wrapper>.xml
```

For a tool suite, update each intended wrapper or use `--recursive` after
checking that every wrapper in the directory belongs in the same update:

```sh
planemo autoupdate --dry-run --recursive tools/<tool>
planemo autoupdate --recursive tools/<tool>
```

If the target version is not the newest version selected by `autoupdate`,
edit the version tokens and requirements deliberately instead.

Apply the [IUC tool-version
rules](https://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tool-versions)
to every affected wrapper. Check the complete suite after automation runs;
shared macros can change wrappers that do not otherwise appear in the diff.

## 3. Adapt the wrapper to the upstream release

Compare the updated software's help and all intervening release notes with the
wrapper. Identify changes that affect the wrapped interface, such as command
line options and defaults, input or output formats, dependencies, or licensing.
Apply the corresponding IUC standards instead of restating them here.

> Make the smallest coherent update. Avoid unrelated cleanup unless it is needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the wrappers accordingly, following the corresponding IUC standards.
Avoid unrelated cleanup unless it is needed
```

approval of the new outputs.

## 5. Validate the complete update

Run linting and tests against the complete tool directory so shared macros and
every affected wrapper are covered:

```sh
planemo lint tools/<tool>
planemo test tools/<tool>
```

Use the Galaxy instance, profile, or other test-engine options appropriate for
your local environment. CI tests with `--biocontainers` (except for the paths
listed in `.tt_biocontainer_skip`), so use it locally too when you can and test
what CI tests. Pull request CI runs the repository lint and test jobs; it does
not require the new BioContainer to exist. The main-branch lint job adds the
BioContainer check after the update has merged.

Run any additional formatter or language-specific checks required by files in
the directory. Review the final diff after testing and confirm that it contains
only intentional changes.

## 6. Prepare the pull request

In the pull request description, record:

- The old and new upstream versions.
- A link to the relevant upstream release notes.
- Important wrapper adaptations and changed defaults or outputs.
- Why test expectations or test data changed.

> - The lint and test commands run, including any tests that could not be run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

the [new tool review guide](guide_for_reviewers.md): this document describes the
update workflow, while the reviewer guide provides the corresponding review
checks.

An update is more than changing a version token. Upstream releases may change
command-line arguments, defaults, output formats, exit behavior, dependencies,
or licensing. Treat the version change, wrapper adaptation, tests, and review
evidence as one change.

## 1. Establish the update scope

Before editing files:

1. Identify the requested upstream version and the wrapper directory.
2. Find every tool XML file and macro file in the tool suite.
3. Identify the main Conda requirement and how the suite defines
   `@TOOL_VERSION@` and `@VERSION_SUFFIX@`.
4. Confirm that the requested package version exists in the best-practice Conda
   channels. Do not require a BioContainer for the new version before merge;
   that image may only be built after the update lands on the main branch.
5. Read the upstream release notes for every version between the current and
   requested versions.

Keep an explicitly requested target version. Do not silently update to a newer

> release merely because it is the newest version available from Conda.

Reviewer 2: "requested" by whom?

You mean that target version should not be changed silently within a PR.

Author: Do we need to specify this ? Does it matter who requested an update ?

> You mean that target version should not be changed silently within a PR.

This refers to line 18, but i agree this is more of a skill shape than what a human would actually do.

Author: Fixed in 70634eb. "requested" is gone throughout both guides — the wording is now "target version", with no implied requester outside the PR. Your reading was the useful part, so the paragraph now says just that: keep the PR description and the diff in agreement about the target version, and say so if the target changes while the PR is open.

(Reply and follow-up commit written with Claude Code, model Opus 5.)

Stop and report the blocker when the requested package is unavailable, the
upstream release is incompatible with the wrapper's supported interface, or the

> required behavior cannot be verified.

Reviewer 2: I do not understand this point.

Author: Again more of an instruction to an agent. I'll skip that.

Author: Dropped in 70634eb — that paragraph read as an instruction to an agent rather than guidance for a contributor.

(Reply and follow-up commit written with Claude Code, model Opus 5.)

particular, changing the Galaxy tool `profile` can change runtime semantics; do
so intentionally and test the consequences.

## 4. Update tests deliberately

Run the existing tests before changing their expectations when practical, then
use failures to distinguish upstream behavior changes from wrapper defects.

- Add or adjust tests for new or changed behavior exposed by the wrapper.
- Preserve coverage of unchanged behavior.
- Prefer semantic assertions over broad tolerances or complete expected-output
  replacement.
- When output contains nondeterministic content, loosen only the unstable part
  and retain assertions for stable invariants.
- Do not accept regenerated test data without inspecting and explaining every
  meaningful difference.
- Keep test data small and remove files that are no longer used.

Use `planemo autoupdate --test` only when its selected target version and test
scope are correct. Treat `--update_test_data` as a proposal generator, not as
approval of the new outputs.

## 5. Validate the complete update

Run linting and tests against the complete tool directory so shared macros and
every affected wrapper are covered:

```sh
planemo lint tools/<tool>

> planemo test tools/<tool>

Reviewer 2: `planemo test --biocontainers tools/<tool>`?

Author: I mean that's up to the author ? If we wanted them to use the CI setup we'd have to include a bunch more options ? Whatever is in the profile seems fine. See the next sentence.

Author: Added a mention in 70634eb, but as an option rather than a requirement: `--biocontainers` is useful when a container for the new version already exists, which is often not the case for the version being added in the PR. The surrounding sentence leaves the Galaxy instance, profile, and dependency resolver up to whatever fits the contributor's local setup.

(Reply and follow-up commit written with Claude Code, model Opus 5.)

Author: Corrected in 5a94809 — my earlier reply here was wrong. `planemo-ci-action` passes `--biocontainers` in test mode itself (`planemo_ci_actions.sh`), for every tool group except the paths in `.tt_biocontainer_skip`, so CI does test with containers even though the flag is not in this repo's workflow YAML. The guide now recommends using it locally to test what CI tests, rather than framing it as only useful when a published image already exists.

(Written with Claude Code, model Opus 5.)
